> [[Wiki|Home]] ▸ **ProtonMail**

[ProtonMail.com](https://protonmail.com/) is an e-mail service provider that has become wildly popular amongst activist groups and politically vocal individuals.

This page offers several evolving critiques of this phenomenon and warns comrades against using ProtonMail without first understanding the risks involved, which can be severe. This critique is not an opinionated editorial; it is a technical and sociopolitical analysis of the ProtonMail service, along with its cultural impact on activist groups, from an anarchist and autonomist perspective.

# Summary

**TL;DR**: ProtonMail uses [weasel words](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weasel_word) to give less technically-experienced people the impression that their service is capable of more than it is. The brand relies on continued ignorance of important details to thrive. If you insist upon using e-mail for any sort of communication, there is no substitute for using PGP/GPG yourself; you can do this with ProtonMail as your service provider, or you can do this with Google. As long as you take the steps necessary to secure the privacy of your email communications on your own, without relying on the promises of a service provider (like ProtonMail) to do this for you, then you can comfortably use ProtonMail or any other service that you wish.

The above summary has its own caveats, but if you haven't the time to read further, that's what you need to know and need to start telling your friends. To learn more about PGP/GPG e-mail encryption, see [[Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)]].

# Contents

1. [What's wrong with ProtonMail?](#whats-wrong-with-protonmail)
1. [ProtonMail's disingenuous advertising](#protonmails-disingenuous-advertising)
1. [ProtonMail's misdirection about their team](#protonmails-misdirection-about-their-team)
1. [ProtonMail's reliance on legality in place of technicality](#protonmails-reliance-on-legality-in-place-of-technicality)

# What's wrong with ProtonMail?

> "Was there a reason Proton Mail is, like, bad? Morally?"

There are reasons I distrust and dislike ProtonMail, but they are a bit misty. Like, it's not one direct thing that's bad, but a combination of factors that together leave a bad taste in my mouth and give me real concerns about my friends's safety. The main reason I dislike ProtonMail is that they are a Silicon Valley corporation (with all that this implies) who consistently use buzz words in order to sound magical about personal security. At best, this is a recipe for miseducation. At worst, this is potent capitalism preying on the vulnerable and uninformed.

# ProtonMail's disingenuous advertising

As I said, ProtonMail is problematic for a few reasons, but the biggest one in my mind is the way they advertise themselves. "Encrypted mail!" they say. But what they don't tell the average person—these are the people their ads and their aesthetic is targeting, mind you—is how encryption actually *works*. No one should need to be a professional cryptographer to use privacy-enhancing software, just as no one should need to become a professional plumber to access running water in their home. But you should at least be aware of these things called pipes that carry water to your house, rather than believing that turning a metal handle magically makes water appear at the top of a faucet and then disappear at its drain.

ProtonMail's encrypted mail service, which is based on OpenPGP, can't deliver what it claims to offer without there being an *end to end* exchange of some kind between correspondents. In point of fact, no encrypted correspondence, regardless of the product or software being discussed, can work without this initial bidirectional exchange, which is needed to set up future private correspondence. Sometimes, this exchange happens automatically, but there are always huge caveats as to *when* this automatic, invisible set up procedure happens, versus when it does not. **The biggest problem with ProtonMail is that they do not make this caveat clear.**

The *only* time this automatic set up process is handled by ProtonMail is when *both* (or *all*) correspondents are using the ProtonMail service itself; that is, when every person involved in the communication is using their `@protonmail.com` email address. If one person has a ProtonMail account but the person they're emailing is using a GMail account, for example, then the email sent from the ProtonMail user to the GMail user are *not* encrypted, and can be read both by certain Google employees and certain ProtonMail employees just like any other email. In this extremely common scenario, none of the privacy benefits that are central to ProtonMail's marketing are present.

Importantly, notice that keeping the contents of emails private is a capability that one can use anywhere, even on GMail, if they take it upon themselves to apply OpenPGP protections themselves. In fact, two GMail users who pre-arrange to use PGP/GPG encryption amongst themselves will have arguably at least as protected and probably a *higher* level of protection *while using GMail* than two ProtonMail users who blindly trust the ProtonMail service to automatically set up their encrypted exchange will have when using ProtonMail. This is not to say that ProtonMail is therefore useless—obviously, not everyone is going to learn how to use PGP themselves—but in ProtonMail's most commonly advertised case of sensitive information being discussed in email, failing to make this operational caveat clear to exactly those users who do not want to set up PGP themselves, is just downright negligent, mad irresponsible, or both.

# ProtonMail's misdirection about their team

The company's first tagline is "Secure email based in Switzerland." This leads many people I've spoken with to believe the the company is Swiss, but that's not true. The actual team behind ProtonMail are Americans based out of Harvard and CalTech, and is supported by significant funding from Silicon Valley investment firms. So the "based in" is partially about the press history and also that their computers (servers) are physically in Switzerland. This isn't particularly unique, though; many companies large and small such as Google and Facebook have servers located in Swiss datacenters and rely on facilities located in Switzerland.

My frustration here does not, of course, stem from a dislike of Switzerland or the Swiss Alps. It is that ProtonMail replaced necessary instructions regarding the safe and correct operation of their product with pictures of Swiss mountains. They want to hand-wave the actual important things to say instead, "You have security 'cause of Swiss privacy laws and no cop will enter a mountain? Also we are smart, like, CERN smart! So we got this."

# ProtonMail's reliance on legality in place of technicality

The hand-waving goes further. In their marketing material, ProtonMail asserts that "messages are encrypted at all times." This refers to what they call their "zero access architecture," and that what little user data they do have is further protected by Swiss laws. I'll get back to the concerns over a legal framework for protection a little later but, for now, let's just take a technical perspective on these claims.

So, from a purley technical standpoint, claiming that "messages are encrypted at all times" can only be meaningful in a ProtonMail-to-ProtonMail exchange, as discussed earlier. The moment a GMail user or *any* other non-ProtonMail user is engaged in the conversation, the email *cannot* be encrypted (by ProtonMail) "at all times" because ProtonMail must, by definition, send the message in a manner that the intended recipient can receive it; it must be decrypted, because the non-ProtonMail recipient is not (also by definition) using ProtonMail's secret sauce. Again, to be clear, the *only* exception to this is when all the correspondents involved take it upon themselves to use PGP *in addition to* whatever email service provider they use, an act that renders the particular choice of email service provider largely irrelevant to this discussion in the first place.

But let's put this huge caveat aside for a moment and generously assume the best possible scenario. What is really going in a ProtonMail-to-ProtonMail exchange? Well, unfortunately, largely due to the proprietary (i.e., commercial and closed-to-outside-inspection) nature of the company's service, there are *still* some glaring technical concerns regarding how the company protects a user's privacy. In other words, whether or not ProtonMail's claimed protection are *actually* protecting users simply cannot be determined without directly auditing their running implementation, as there is no self-hostable, on-premises version of ProtonMail's offering; if you use ProtonMail, you are using ProtonMail's cloud, their computers, not yours. Of course, auditing ProtonMail's running implementation is not something anyone outside the company is permitted to do. That would be tantamount to a data breach, which is precisely the sort of thing the company is trying to avoid. Ultimately, we are once again asked to take a leap of (too much) faith.

Here, too, there are some technical nuances worth explaining.

First, it's important to understand how email messages actually get delivered. Like most electronic communications we are now accustomed to, email is a "store and forward" system. This just means that instead of delivering your message directly to your intended recipient, you instead hand a copy of your message to an intermediate third-party (like, say, ProtonMail) who will store your message for some period of time, and then forward it on either to another intermediary (like, say, GMail), if that's necessary, or to your intended recipient, if that's possible for them to do at that point. This mechanism in which someone *other* than your intended recipient holds on to your message on your behalf for some time is what makes it possible for you to send email to someone who is not online at the exact same time that you send email to them.

This part of email's design is what makes it so important for you as someone who sends sensitive information in email to be able to trust the intermediaries that handle your email for you. If you could always trust commercial email service providers (like Google's GMail or, y'know, ProtonMail) not to read your email, there would have been no reason to create, and certainly no reason to invest in, a company like ProtonMail in the first place. ProtonMail's very existence hinges on the fact that users of ProtonMail's competitors believe their email service providers are spying on them. Therefore, in order to have any value at all, it is existentially vital for ProtonMail-the-company to make its own users believe that they *cannot* be spied on, but in point of fact, they *can*. They may not (and, in all likelihood, *probably* are not spying on *you*), but they can. And the mere fact that it is *possible* is why there is any talk of legal protections in the first place.

Think about it: if it were simply not technically possible, in *any* situation, for ProtonMail to have access to  user data, legal protections just wouldn't be of any additional benefit.

Second, it's important to understand the difference between an email that's being stored while waiting to be forwarded (cybersecurity pros call this state "data at rest") and an email that's actively in the process of being forwarded (called "data in motion"). These two different states require the use of two different protection mechanisms.

The mechanism used to protect the latter state, data in motion, is generically termed *transport encryption* (specifically, TLS, short for Transport Layer Security) because, as the name implies, it protects data while it is being transported. This kind of protection is actually supported by many of ProtonMail's largest competitors, including GMail.

If you're surprised by this (and many people I've spoken to are), it's because ProtonMail doesn't make this distinction clear. That gives me the feeling that the company wants to become a new niche titan. They seem to want to replace other companies—i.e., competitors—instead of empower people. They are not interested in teaching us, their supposed customers, what all this "secure email" stuff actually means. And if you don't know what all this actually means or, worse, are miseducated to think it means something it doesn't, then you *have* to rely on the company's offering. That is, you become dependent on them. And what, pray tell, is more perfectly capitalist, more undeniably Silicon Valley, than creating unnecessary dependencies?

For what it's worth, this distinction isn't particularly complicated. You're probably already familiar with a more common form of transport encryption called HTTPS, which is visually indicated by the little green padlock next to or inside of the address or location bar in your Web browser. Both Web sites (like the ones used as webmail interfaces) and email servers can use transport encryption; HTTPS is used by your Web browser to securely connect to and privately load websites, while SMTPS or IMAPS is used by email servers and email client software, respectively, to securely transmit emails across a network, such as the Internet.

Since both GMail and ProtonMail support SMTPS, when a ProtonMail user sends email to a GMail user, the following simplified sequence of events happens:

1. The ProtonMail user opens a Web browser and makes a connection to ProtonMail.com (using HTTPS), writes an email, and hits send.
2. ProtonMail looks at the recipient email address and, upon seeing that it ends in `@gmail.com`, determines that it needs to send the email to one of Google's email servers (using SMTPS). During the transmission from ProtonMail's computer to Google's, the email contents are *not* encrypted, so ProtonMail *and* Google both can read the email's contents during transmission. However, no *other* eavesdropper, such as Google's or ProtonMail's ISP, can read the email contents thanks to ProtonMail's and GMail's cooperation in using transport encryption.
3. Google's email servers receives the email, and saves an unencrypted copy of it on a hard disk drive waiting for the GMail user to log in and retrieve it. This is unprotected data at rest. During this time, Google can still read the email.
4. The GMail user logs in, and can [see whether or not the message was "delivered securely."](https://support.google.com/mail/answer/6330403?hl=en) For instance, in the GMail app on Android, you can see a "Security details" user-interface fragment that describes the email's *delivery* security properties (whether Google received the email from an SMTP server that used transport encryption).

The important thing to note from the above sequence is that transport encryption protects data *only* while it is in transit. Once the data arrives at its destination, regardless of whether that is a final destination or an intermediate one, transport encryption is no longer in effect. This is true for both websites and email messages, i.e., the protection offered by transport encryption is a property of the transport encryption itself, not of the data it protects.

Using weasel words to describe this distinction between protecting data at rest versus data in motion lets ProtonMail claim to have "end to end encryption," but what they're really saying is "no one *except your mail provider* can read your email." This is *true*, because as long as ProtonMail uses transport-layer protections (i.e., they are protecting data "in motion") and GMail uses transport-layer protections (and they are), then the contents of the email are encrypted when traveling from your Web browser to ProtonMail, then decrypted, then re-encrypted for transit to Google, then decrypted, then re-encrypted for transit from Google to your phone.

Meanwhile, the mechanism used to protect the email's other state, data at rest, is *also* supported by many other providers, notably [RiseUp Networks](https://riseup.net/). It is sometimes generically termed *storage encryption*. As far as the public knows at the time of this writing, this kind of protection is *not* implemented by Google and much of the rest of Silicon Valley. Encrypting the data-at-rest on a server, like RiseUp's email offering, does not mean the email messages themselves are encrypted "end to end." Rather, it merely means that the emails being stored there, waiting to be forwarded, are encrypted while they wait to be processed for delivery. This kind of protection is a deterrent against police raids, for example; the cops cannot read what is stored on that server when they physically pull the hard drive out of the computer and inspect it.

Protecting data at rest in this way is certainly better than not doing so, but the fact is that much of the data being protected in this manner is already accomplished simply by using PGP itself. Not *all* data is protected (notably the email's envelope, i.e., who the message is from and who it is being sent to) from a police raid merely by PGP, but for the purposes of the the ProtonMail discussion with respect to ProtonMail's marketing push, much of it is. Since an email that you encrypt using PGP is encrypted *on your computer* and not decrypted until just before it is displayed *on your recipient's computer*, the email contents itself is protected *by PGP* both at rest on any email service provider's computers and in motion while being transported to and from them. Like storage encryption, transport encryption is *still* important, but in this case what it is functionally needed for is to protect things like your login username and password, *not* your email. That's already been taken care of.

> 🚧 TK-TODO: Complete section.

# Scratchpad

they even recently created "[ProtonMail Bridge](https://protonmail.com/blog/thunderbird-outlook-encrypted-email/)" Which attempts to "solve" this problem, but it solves the problem with their own proprietary solution. Which means it's actually a nonsolution to no problem, because we already have had PGP for, like, ever. Literally since the 1980s.

The second thing to note is that insofar as message *content* encryption is concerned, what ProtonMail offers to users of ProtonMail who send email to other users of ProtonMail is the same thing as, say, Signal *in principle* but not *in practice* because ProtonMail chooses which lock to put on your message: if I were a ProtonMail programmer, I could write a line of code that says "When Bob sends an email to Alice, instead of using Alice's lock, use mine." And Bob would never be the wiser, because there is no point during the experience of using ProtonMail that Bob is ever presented with the option to choose Alice's lock for his own message. This is what is meant by "key management." When I say, in the [WP PGP Encrypted Emails](https://wordpress.org/plugins/wp-pgp-encrypted-emails/) plugin that "users manage their own keys," it means that the software does not make choices for you about which public key (lock) to encrypt the message to. That's GOOD, because it means *you* get to choose that. This, of course, is "hard for users," and so "secure messaging apps" like ProtonMail, or Apple's iMessage,  which "manage the keys for the user," are *technically* "end-to-end encrypted," but not actually trustworthy unless you trust the service provider *managing the keys.*

Reasons to distrust Protonmail:

(1) Protonmail stores users' private keys on Protonmail's server. This requires trust in the provider, as noted above, which a truly "trustworthy" provider would never ask for.  Requiring trust is a big no-no in any service that purports to be secure in-depth (for example: against attacks carried out via legal compulsion leverated over otherwise trustworthy sysadmins), It should be noted that requiring users to trust Protonmail to store and decrypt their private keys requires even *more* trust than Signal, whose servers only stores ["pre-key" material](https://security.stackexchange.com/questions/121304/how-does-the-signal-protocol-used-by-whatsapp-work/123939#123939) and not actual private key material, which is always stored in clients.).

(2) Protonmail purports to safely store a user's private key by encrypting it to a password that the user must provide upon login (much like you are prompted for a password to gain access to your private key when using gpg from the command line or Engmail in Thunderbird).  *But* the fact that Protonmail asks for this password via the browser, and then allows you to temporarily store private key material in the browser raises *serious* concerns that (to my knowledge) they nowhere address.

in the browser are problematic for a few reasons. The core reason is that there is a long-running controversy over whether pgp encryption can be safely accomplished in javascript at all (see, eg: https://www.nccgroup.trust/us/about-us/newsroom-and-events/blog/2011/august/javascript-cryptography-considered-harmful/), which is what the underlying PGP implementation that Protonmail uses (https://openpgpjs.org/) claims to do. So, assuming a perfectly trustworthy sofware provider under no compulsion, given the fact that they are attempting to perform crypto in javascript, I would at least expect a detailed explanation as to why they feel they have accomplished this and I should "trust" it. To my knowledge (I'd love to learn I'm wrong), they neither provide such an explanation or even acknowledge that it is a known Hard Problem (tm).

Further eroding my trust in the fact that the code runs in the browser is, despite this being mitigated somewhat by the recently standardized [W3C's Subresource Integrity (SRI) mechanisms](https://www.w3.org/TR/SRI/) to whitelist remote resource contents, the fact that *by virtue* of it running the browser, I have no strong guarantee that the code that is running is actually the code that has been published and audited by Protonmail. Quite literally upon every HTTP request, a different javascript payload could be provided and unless I am manually inspecting the (minified) source code (which would show me very little because that's what minification accomplishes: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minification_(programming)), then I have no guarantee that malicious code has not been injected and compromising my private key (and with it the ability to decrypt all my messages and pose as me).

But even *furthermore* the fact that I am asked to transmit this password to a server I do not control. How do I know that the code is not siphoning off my password? Where is the code that I may inspect? How do I know that Protonmail has not been forced under compulsion to provide my password? Which is just to say: why do they have to *know* my password at all in order for their encryption story to work?

All of these problems were present in the last two examples of PGP email solutions that sought mass adoption my asking users to trust either a browser (hushmail) or a provider with access to private key materials (lavabit). In both cases, government agencies sought to compel the provider to substitute code that would compromise passwords for targeted users (hushmail) or directly provide the ability to decrypt private key material (lavabit).

That is why anyone who has thought seriously about the problem of "user-friendly" encrypted email (riseup's LEAP project is a decent example: https://leap.se/en/docs/tech) has gone to great lengths to (1) keep encryption operations out of the browser and in code that executes as a desktop binary that can be "reproducibly built" (https://reproducible-builds.org/) and thus verified to match the published code. They also (2) ask for passwords through "zero knowledge" methods such as SRP (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Remote_Password_protocol) such that even a compromised (or legally compelled) provider would not be able to control the private key it stores encrypted at rest. But most importantly: (3) they acknowledge that these problems are HARD (https://leap.se/en/docs/tech/hard-problems) and try to bring users along on the ride of understanding why they have made the choices they have made in trying to solve them.

This just reduces back to our key points: they try to "magic away" all the problem solving that's going on, and in so doing, induce a passive/consumptive relationship to technology ("verbing" not only themselves but the actual and real friction of the problem they're trying to solve for me out of existence) instead of helping me build an active and empowered one. At the bottom of it, that's why I will never trust their solutions. Because they ask me to. And don't acknowledge that this is what they're asking me. And I've never built a truly trustworthy relationship that started with a lie.

So, because of SRI, the only thing in your beautiful rant that I would quibble with at all is the part about the browser itself, by virtue of being a browser, does not offer a guarantee that the code you're getting from ProtonMail is the code you expect. You perfectly describe exactly what would need to be done to ensure that the code you are getting is the code you want, which is to audit the source (minified if necessary) and then take the hash of that code, and then *on each HTTP request* verify that the code you received is the code you expected. Thankfully, that's *exactly* what the `integrity` attribute defined by the W3C's SRI Rec is designed to automate. :D

There are, of course, reasons why a site would not want to do this, and interestingly they are the same reasons pointed out about "magicking away" the details for people: if I am widgetco.com and I want it to be "easy" for you to display my widget in your site's sidebar, I want to give you a URL like `https://widgetco.com/sidebar_widget.js`. The point here is that the URL doesn't declare anything about its content, which makes it easy for me to update it when *I* want to.

What I'm saying with a URL like this is, "Hey, don't worry about updating your copy of my example widget in your sidebar when I release a new version. *I'll do it for you.*"

To understand that, let's compare it with another way of doing something like this. I'm widgetco and I know you care about knowing what code you're running. So I give you a URL like this: `https://widgetco.com/v1/sidebar_widget.js` Now, I'm telling you, "Here is the version of the program you intended to install. It's version 1. It's at this URL. And I *promise* I will not change it." Now the question is: how much do you trust my promise?

And that is *also* what SRI *could* be for: giving the end-user the ability to say, "Hey, you promised you wouldn't change the code coming from this URL, and since I wasn't automating checking up on that all the time, I didn't notice, until now." Which is…neat. :)
